docs: Replace rr diagram from alter cluster + add to clusters concept… (#30169)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/sql/alter-cluster.md

    parent: 'commands'
---

> `ALTER CLUSTER` changes the configuration of a cluster, such as the `SIZE` or

Author: https://preview.materialize.com/materialize/30169/sql/alter-cluster/#syntax

`REPLICATON FACTOR`.

{{< admonition type="Disambiguation" >}}

> This page covers the usage of `ALTER CLUSTER` to change the cluster's

Author: With the new structure, we could actually fold in ALTER CLUSTER <cluster_name> RENAME TO in here.

*configuration*. To change the name of a cluster, see [`ALTER ... RENAME
TO`](/sql/alter-rename/).

{{</ admonition >}}

## Syntax

`ALTER CLUSTER` has the following syntax forms:

> - To set a cluster configuration:

Author: We could tab these.

  ```mzsql
  ALTER CLUSTER <cluster_name>
  SET (

>     <config1> = <config_value1> [, ... ]  -- equal sign ('=') is optional

Author: Alternatively, we could list each config here as well as in the table below:

```
ALTER CLUSTER <cluster_name>
SET (
    SIZE = <text>,                                     -- Optional.
    REPLICATION FACTOR= <int>,                      -- Optional.
    INTROSPECTION INTERVAL = <interval>,     -- Optional.
    INTROSPECTION DEBUGGING = <bool>,      -- Optional.
    MANAGED = <bool>,                                         -- Optional.
    SCHEDULE = [MANUAL | ON REFRESH (...)]  -- Optional.
)
WITH ( <command_options> )                             -- Optional.
;
```

And later, in the command options section, flesh out the 

```
WITH (
      WAIT UNTIL READY ([TIMEOUT | ON TIMEOUT [COMMIT|ROLLBACK])
)

-- or --

WITH (
      WAIT FOR <duration> 
)
```

So, basically, we can do a lot of things.  So, don't be shy.

Author: So ... added all the options.  and went with using [ ] ... but for now, punting on using italics as non-trivial.

Author: Tweaked further because using [ ]  for all that could be optional is too messy and doesn't actually help people in practice since they would have to copy and remove all the extraneous [ ] , which is tedious.

  )
  WITH ( <command_options> )               -- Optional.
  ;
  ```

- To reset a cluster configuration back to its default value:

  ```mzsql
  ALTER CLUSTER <cluster_name>
  RESET (
    <config1>[,  <config2>, ...]
  )
  WITH ( <command_options> )              -- Optional.
  ;

  ```

### Cluster Configurations

The following cluster configurations can be modified with `ALTER CLUSTER`:

{{% alter-cluster/alter-cluster-options %}}

### Command Options

Optionally, you can include a `WITH (<command option>)` to the [`ALTER CLUSTER`
statement](#syntax) to run with command options.

The following command options are

> available:

Author: They can sometimes help with search rankings but can take out for now as not the main factor in our search ranking issues at the moment.

    parent: 'commands'
---

`ALTER CLUSTER` changes the configuration of a cluster, such as the `SIZE` or
`REPLICATON FACTOR`.

## Syntax

> `ALTER CLUSTER` has the following syntax forms:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ALTER CLUSTER` has the following syntax variations:
```

{{< tabs >}}

> {{< tab "Set a configuration" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< tab "Change configuration values" >}}
```

Author: Oh ... some of this repetition of the exact command syntax is for search results purposes.  But, absolutely understand your intent though.

> To set a cluster configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To change the value of a cluster configuration option:
```

Author: The search thing again. Now, having "Change" is also good because people probably would not lookup "Alter" and would instead look up "Change".  But, "set" may be marginally better in that although too generic, people tend to remember some part of the command. 

Once, some of our search results improve, updating the content to "change ..." will definitely be the way to go.

  ```mzsql
  ALTER CLUSTER <cluster_name>
  SET (
      SIZE = <text>,
      REPLICATION FACTOR = <int>,
      INTROSPECTION INTERVAL = <interval>,
      INTROSPECTION DEBUGGING = <bool>,
      MANAGED = <bool>,
      SCHEDULE = { MANUAL | ON REFRESH (...) }
  )
  [WITH ({ WAIT UNTIL READY({TIMEOUT | ON TIMEOUT {COMMIT|ROLLBACK}}) | WAIT FOR <duration> })]
  ;
  ```

You must have ownership of the cluster. See also [Required

> privileges](#required-privileges).

Reviewer: Is it helpful to point to the required privileges section if none of the other privileges apply to the syntax in this tab?Users will get an error if they don't have the right privileges. It'd be easier to maintain the privileges section if we just kept it in that one place, but if we want to add something more useful, we could include the commands to verify the current ownership and add some more practical advice (e.g., altering ownership of the cluster to a role the requesting role is also a member of).

Author: Can remove.

{{< /tab >}}

> {{< tab "Reset to default" >}}

Reviewer: We can roll this up into the previous tag; no need to separate them. Both variations accomplish the same thing: changing the value for a configuration option.

Author: The search thing.

To reset a cluster configuration back to its default value:

  ```mzsql
  ALTER CLUSTER <cluster_name>
  RESET (
      REPLICATION FACTOR,
      INTROSPECTION INTERVAL,
      INTROSPECTION DEBUGGING,
      MANAGED,
      SCHEDULE
  )
  ;
  ```

You must have ownership of the cluster. See also [Required
privileges](#required-privileges).

{{< /tab >}}

> {{< tab "Rename to" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< tab "Rename" >}}
```

To rename a cluster:

  ```mzsql
  ALTER CLUSTER <cluster_name> RENAME TO <new_cluster_name>;
  ```

You must have ownership of the cluster. See also [Required
privileges](#required-privileges).

{{< /tab >}}

> {{< tab "Alter owner to" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< tab "Change ownership" >}}
```

To change the owner of a cluster:

  ```mzsql
  ALTER CLUSTER <cluster_name> OWNER TO <new_owner_role>;
  ```

To rename a cluster, you must have ownership of the cluster and membership in
the `<new_owner_role>`. See also [Required privileges](#required-privileges).

{{< /tab >}}

> {{< tab "Swap names with another cluster" >}}

Reviewer: This isn't an operation that a user would run manually. This should be contextualized within blue/green deployments.

Reviewer: I think we discussed this elsewhere in the PR, but I'd +1 having the full syntax listed under `Syntax`, and instead provide examples for the operations each syntax variation allows you to perform under `Examples`.

Author: - Swap names: I did wonder why we had a whole page for this.  Will blurb that it's for blue/green and included just for completeness.

- As for the listing the full syntax, as playing around with this particular command, I think for a small subset of our commands (like Alter cluster), it may be easier for our users to have them separated for now since less to tweak after copying.  As I work through other pages, it may turn out that I find a way that won't be cumbersome for our users to have everything in one and will retrofit.
  - I'm strongly **+1** for examples for each variation -- but to keep balls rolling on other work, didn't do it in this PR.

Author: Oh ... and later on,  by the time I get to the `ALTER SCHEMA` page, it might be that we may want to remove the `swap with` part wholesale from our user facing docs.

To swap the name of this cluster with another cluster:

  ```mzsql
  ALTER CLUSTER <cluster1> SWAP WITH <cluster2>;
  ```

To swap names with another cluster, you must have ownership of both clusters.
See also [Required privileges](#required-privileges).

{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Cluster configuration

{{% alter-cluster/alter-cluster-options %}}

### `WITH` options

> {{< note >}}
> *Private preview* for [graceful cluster resizing](#graceful-cluster-resizing).
> {{< /note >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Common practice is to include the PrPr tag in the description of the configuration options.

| Command options (optional) | Value | Description |
|----------------------------|-------|-----------------|

> | `WAIT UNTIL READY(...)`    |  | {{< alter-cluster/alter-clusters-cmd-options >}} |
> | `WAIT FOR` | `duration` | A fixed duration to wait for the new replicas to be ready. This option can lead to downtime. As such, we recommend using the `WAIT UNTIL READY` option instead.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `WAIT UNTIL READY(...)`    |  | ***Private preview.** This option has known performance or stability issues and is under active development.* {{< alter-cluster/alter-clusters-cmd-options >}} |
| `WAIT FOR` | [`interval`](/sql/types/interval/) | ***Private preview.** This option has known performance or stability issues and is under active development.* A fixed duration to wait for the new replicas to be ready. This option can lead to downtime. As such, we recommend using the `WAIT UNTIL READY` option instead.|
```

## Considerations

### Resizing

{{< tip >}}

> To help size your clusters, **Materialize Console >** [**Monitoring**
> section](/console/monitoring/) provides an **Environment Overview** page that
> displays the cluster resource utilization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For help sizing your clusters, navigate to **Materialize Console >**
[**Monitoring**](/console/monitoring/)>**Environment Overview**. This page
displays cluster resource utilization and sizing advice.
```

same dataflows and process the same queries) as all the other replicas of the
cluster.

To increase a cluster's capacity, you should instead increase the cluster's
[size](#resizing).
{{< /note >}}

#### Guarantees

Materialize makes the following guarantees when provisioning replicas:

- Replicas of a given cluster are never provisioned on the same underlying
  hardware.
- Replicas of a given cluster are spread as evenly as possible across the
  underlying cloud provider's availability zones. However, when a cluster of
  size `3200cc` or larger uses multiple replicas, those replicas are not
  guaranteed to be spread evenly across the underlying cloud provider's
  availability zones.

Materialize automatically assigns names to replicas like `r1`, `r2`, etc. You
can view information about individual replicas in the console and the system
catalog, but you cannot directly modify individual replicas.

#### Replication factor `0`

You can pause a cluster's work by specifying a replication factor of `0`. Doing
so removes all replicas of the cluster. Any indexes, materialized views,
sources, and sinks on the cluster **will cease** to make progress, and any

> queries directed to the cluster will block. You can later resume the cluster's

Author: That's what's currently on the create cluster page (last paragraph):  https://materialize.com/docs/sql/create-cluster/#replication-factor 
Can remove:
- The section on this page per your previous comment above about having this section
- The paragraph in the create cluster page.

- [Manage privileges](/manage/access-control/manage-privileges/)

## Examples

### Replication factor

The following example uses `ALTER CLUSTER` to update the `REPLICATION
FACTOR` of cluster `c1` to ``2``:

```mzsql
ALTER CLUSTER c1 SET (REPLICATION FACTOR 2);
```

Increasing the `REPLICATION FACTOR` increases the cluster's [fault
tolerance](#replication-factor-and-fault-tolerance), not its work capacity.

{{< note >}}
Clusters containing sources and sinks can only have a replication factor of `0`
or `1`.
{{</ note >}}

### Resizing

- For clusters **without any sources and sinks**, you can alter the cluster size
  with **no downtime** (i.e., [graceful cluster
  resizing](#graceful-cluster-resizing)) by running the `ALTER CLUSTER` command
  `WITH` the `WAIT UNTIL READY` [command option](#command-options):

  ```mzsql
  ALTER CLUSTER c1
  SET (SIZE '100CC') WITH (WAIT UNTIL READY (TIMEOUT = '10m', ON TIMEOUT = 'COMMIT'));
  ````

- For clusters **with sources or sinks,** you can alter the cluster size;
  however, this operation incurs **downtime**:

  ```mzsql
  ALTER CLUSTER c1 SET (SIZE '100cc');
  ```

### Schedule

{{< private-preview />}}

> You can use `ALTER CLUSTER` to [automatically schedule when the cluster is
> provisioned with compute resources)](../create-cluster/#scheduling) to align
> with the [refresh schedule of your materialized
> view(s)](/sql/create-materialized-view/#refresh-strategies). Scheduled clusters
> only consume credits for the duration of the refreshes.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For use cases that require using [scheduled clusters](/sql/create-cluster/#scheduling),
you can set or change the originally configured schedule and related options
using the `ALTER CLUSTER` command.
```

[size](#resizing) * its replication factor. See [Usage &
billing](/administration/billing/) for more details.

#### Replication factor and fault tolerance

Provisioning more than one replica provides **fault tolerance**. Clusters with
multiple replicas can tolerate failures of the underlying hardware that cause a
replica to become unreachable. As long as one replica of the cluster remains
available, the cluster can continue to maintain dataflows and serve queries.

{{< note >}}

- Each replica incurs cost, calculated (at one second granularity) as cluster
  [size](#resizing) * its replication factor. See [Usage &
  billing](/administration/billing/) for more details.

- Increasing the replication factor does **not** increase the cluster's work
  capacity. Replicas are exact copies of one another: each replica must do
  exactly the same work (i.e., maintain the same dataflows and process the same
  queries) as all the other replicas of the cluster.

  To increase the capacity of a cluster, you must increase its
  [size](#resizing).

{{< /note >}}

Materialize automatically assigns names to replicas (e.g., `r1`, `r2`). You can

> view information about individual replicas in the console and the system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
view information about individual replicas in the Materialize console and the system
```
